      Historical version of the Constitution for the Debian Project (v1.3)

   Version 1.3 ratified on September 24th, 2006. Supersedes Version 1.2
   ratified on October 29th, 2003 and Version 1.1 ratified on June 21st,
   2003, which itself supersedes Version 1.0 ratified on December 2nd,
   1998. That was superseded by the current version, 1.4 ratified on
   October 7th, 2007.
   1. Introduction

   The Debian Project is an association of individuals who have made
   common cause to create a free operating system.

   This document describes the organisational structure for formal
   decision-making in the Project. It does not describe the goals of the
   Project or how it achieves them, or contain any policies except those
   directly related to the decision-making process.
   2. Decision-making bodies and individuals

   Each decision in the Project is made by one or more of the following:
    1. The Developers, by way of General Resolution or an election;
    2. The Project Leader;
    3. The Technical Committee and/or its Chairman;
    4. The individual Developer working on a particular task;
    5. Delegates appointed by the Project Leader for specific tasks;
    6. The Project Secretary.

   Most of the remainder of this document will outline the powers of these
   bodies, their composition and appointment, and the procedure for their
   decision-making. The powers of a person or body may be subject to
   review and/or limitation by others; in this case the reviewing body or
   person's entry will state this. In the list above, a person or body is
   usually listed before any people or bodies whose decisions they can
   overrule or who they (help) appoint - but not everyone listed earlier
   can overrule everyone listed later.

  2.1. General rules

    1. Nothing in this constitution imposes an obligation on anyone to do
       work for the Project. A person who does not want to do a task which
       has been delegated or assigned to them does not need to do it.
       However, they must not actively work against these rules and
       decisions properly made under them.
    2. A person may hold several posts, except that the Project Leader,
       Project Secretary and the Chairman of the Technical Committee must
       be distinct, and that the Leader cannot appoint themselves as their
       own Delegate.
    3. A person may leave the Project or resign from a particular post
       they hold, at any time, by stating so publicly.

   3. Individual Developers

  3.1. Powers

   An individual Developer may
    1. make any technical or nontechnical decision with regard to their
       own work;
    2. propose or sponsor draft General Resolutions;
    3. propose themselves as a Project Leader candidate in elections;
    4. vote on General Resolutions and in Leadership elections.

  3.2. Composition and appointment

    1. Developers are volunteers who agree to further the aims of the
       Project insofar as they participate in it, and who maintain
       package(s) for the Project or do other work which the Project
       Leader's Delegate(s) consider worthwhile.
    2. The Project Leader's Delegate(s) may choose not to admit new
       Developers, or expel existing Developers. If the Developers feel
       that the Delegates are abusing their authority they can of course
       override the decision by way of General Resolution - see §4.1(3),
       §4.2.

  3.3. Procedure

   Developers may make these decisions as they see fit.
   4. The Developers by way of General Resolution or election

  4.1. Powers

   Together, the Developers may:
    1. Appoint or recall the Project Leader.
    2. Amend this constitution, provided they agree with a 3:1 majority.
    3. Make or override any decision authorised by the powers of the
       Project Leader or a Delegate.
    4. Make or override any decision authorised by the powers of the
       Technical Committee, provided they agree with a 2:1 majority.
    5. Issue, supersede and withdraw nontechnical policy documents and
       statements.
       These include documents describing the goals of the project, its
       relationship with other free software entities, and nontechnical
       policies such as the free software licence terms that Debian
       software must meet.
       They may also include position statements about issues of the day.
         1. A Foundation Document is a document or statement regarded as
            critical to the Project's mission and purposes.
         2. The Foundation Documents are the works entitled "Debian Social
            Contract" and "Debian Free Software Guidelines".
         3. A Foundation Document requires a 3:1 majority for its
            supersession. New Foundation Documents are issued and existing
            ones withdrawn by amending the list of Foundation Documents in
            this constitution.
    6. Make decisions about property held in trust for purposes related to
       Debian. (See §9.).
    7. In case of a disagreement between the project leader and the
       incumbent secretary, appoint a new secretary.

  4.2. Procedure

    1. The Developers follow the Standard Resolution Procedure, below. A
       resolution or amendment is introduced if proposed by any Developer
       and sponsored by at least K other Developers, or if proposed by the
       Project Leader or the Technical Committee.
    2. Delaying a decision by the Project Leader or their Delegate:
         1. If the Project Leader or their Delegate, or the Technical
            Committee, has made a decision, then Developers can override
            them by passing a resolution to do so; see §4.1(3).
         2. If such a resolution is sponsored by at least 2K Developers,
            or if it is proposed by the Technical Committee, the
            resolution puts the decision immediately on hold (provided
            that resolution itself says so).
         3. If the original decision was to change a discussion period or
            a voting period, or the resolution is to override the
            Technical Committee, then only K Developers need to sponsor
            the resolution to be able to put the decision immediately on
            hold.
         4. If the decision is put on hold, an immediate vote is held to
            determine whether the decision will stand until the full vote
            on the decision is made or whether the implementation of the
            original decision will be delayed until then. There is no
            quorum for this immediate procedural vote.
         5. If the Project Leader (or the Delegate) withdraws the original
            decision, the vote becomes moot, and is no longer conducted.
    3. Votes are taken by the Project Secretary. Votes, tallies, and
       results are not revealed during the voting period; after the vote
       the Project Secretary lists all the votes cast. The voting period
       is 2 weeks, but may be varied by up to 1 week by the Project
       Leader.
    4. The minimum discussion period is 2 weeks, but may be varied by up
       to 1 week by the Project Leader. The Project Leader has a casting
       vote. There is a quorum of 3Q.
    5. Proposals, sponsors, amendments, calls for votes and other formal
       actions are made by announcement on a publicly-readable electronic
       mailing list designated by the Project Leader's Delegate(s); any
       Developer may post there.
    6. Votes are cast by email in a manner suitable to the Secretary. The
       Secretary determines for each poll whether voters can change their
       votes.
    7. Q is half of the square root of the number of current Developers. K
       is Q or 5, whichever is the smaller. Q and K need not be integers
       and are not rounded.

   5. Project Leader

  5.1. Powers

   The Project Leader may:
    1. Appoint Delegates or delegate decisions to the Technical Committee.
       The Leader may define an area of ongoing responsibility or a
       specific decision and hand it over to another Developer or to the
       Technical Committee.
       Once a particular decision has been delegated and made the Project
       Leader may not withdraw that delegation; however, they may withdraw
       an ongoing delegation of particular area of responsibility.
    2. Lend authority to other Developers.
       The Project Leader may make statements of support for points of
       view or for other members of the project, when asked or otherwise;
       these statements have force if and only if the Leader would be
       empowered to make the decision in question.
    3. Make any decision which requires urgent action.
       This does not apply to decisions which have only become gradually
       urgent through lack of relevant action, unless there is a fixed
       deadline.
    4. Make any decision for whom noone else has responsibility.
    5. Propose draft General Resolutions and amendments.
    6. Together with the Technical Committee, appoint new members to the
       Committee. (See §6.2.)
    7. Use a casting vote when Developers vote.
       The Project Leader also has a normal vote in such ballots.
    8. Vary the discussion period for Developers' votes (as above).
    9. Lead discussions amongst Developers.
       The Project Leader should attempt to participate in discussions
       amongst the Developers in a helpful way which seeks to bring the
       discussion to bear on the key issues at hand. The Project Leader
       should not use the Leadership position to promote their own
       personal views.
   10. In consultation with the developers, make decisions affecting
       property held in trust for purposes related to Debian. (See §9.).
       Such decisions are communicated to the members by the Project
       Leader or their Delegate(s). Major expenditures should be proposed
       and debated on the mailing list before funds are disbursed.
   11. Add or remove organizations from the list of trusted organizations
       (see §9.3) that are authorized to accept and hold assets for
       Debian. The evaluation and discussion leading up to such a decision
       occurs on an electronic mailing list designated by the Project
       Leader or their Delegate(s), on which any developer may post. There
       is a minimum discussion period of two weeks before an organization
       may be added to the list of trusted organizations.

  5.2. Appointment

    1. The Project Leader is elected by the Developers.
    2. The election begins nine weeks before the leadership post becomes
       vacant, or (if it is too late already) immediately.
    3. For the following three weeks any Developer may nominate themselves
       as a candidate Project Leader.
    4. For three weeks after that no more candidates may be nominated;
       candidates should use this time for campaigning (to make their
       identities and positions known). If there are no candidates at the
       end of the nomination period then the nomination period is extended
       for three further weeks, repeatedly if necessary.
    5. The next three weeks are the polling period during which Developers
       may cast their votes. Votes in leadership elections are kept
       secret, even after the election is finished.
    6. The options on the ballot will be those candidates who have
       nominated themselves and have not yet withdrawn, plus None Of The
       Above. If None Of The Above wins the election then the election
       procedure is repeated, many times if necessary.
    7. The decision will be made using the method specified in section
       §A.6 of the Standard Resolution Procedure. The quorum is the same
       as for a General Resolution (§4.2) and the default option is "None
       Of The Above".
    8. The Project Leader serves for one year from their election.

  5.3. Procedure

   The Project Leader should attempt to make decisions which are
   consistent with the consensus of the opinions of the Developers.

   Where practical the Project Leader should informally solicit the views
   of the Developers.

   The Project Leader should avoid overemphasizing their own point of view
   when making decisions in their capacity as Leader.
   6. Technical committee

  6.1. Powers

   The Technical Committee may:
    1. Decide on any matter of technical policy.
       This includes the contents of the technical policy manuals,
       developers' reference materials, example packages and the behaviour
       of non-experimental package building tools. (In each case the usual
       maintainer of the relevant software or documentation makes
       decisions initially, however; see 6.3(5).)
    2. Decide any technical matter where Developers' jurisdictions
       overlap.
       In cases where Developers need to implement compatible technical
       policies or stances (for example, if they disagree about the
       priorities of conflicting packages, or about ownership of a command
       name, or about which package is responsible for a bug that both
       maintainers agree is a bug, or about who should be the maintainer
       for a package) the technical committee may decide the matter.
    3. Make a decision when asked to do so.
       Any person or body may delegate a decision of their own to the
       Technical Committee, or seek advice from it.
    4. Overrule a Developer (requires a 3:1 majority).
       The Technical Committee may ask a Developer to take a particular
       technical course of action even if the Developer does not wish to;
       this requires a 3:1 majority. For example, the Committee may
       determine that a complaint made by the submitter of a bug is
       justified and that the submitter's proposed solution should be
       implemented.
    5. Offer advice.
       The Technical Committee may make formal announcements about its
       views on any matter. Individual members may of course make informal
       statements about their views and about the likely views of the
       committee.
    6. Together with the Project Leader, appoint new members to itself or
       remove existing members. (See §6.2.)
    7. Appoint the Chairman of the Technical Committee.
       The Chairman is elected by the Committee from its members. All
       members of the committee are automatically nominated; the committee
       votes starting one week before the post will become vacant (or
       immediately, if it is already too late). The members may vote by
       public acclamation for any fellow committee member, including
       themselves; there is no default option. The vote finishes when all
       the members have voted, or when the voting period has ended. The
       result is determined using the method specified in section A.6 of
       the Standard Resolution Procedure.
    8. The Chairman can stand in for the Leader, together with the
       Secretary
       As detailed in §7.1(2), the Chairman of the Technical Committee and
       the Project Secretary may together stand in for the Leader if there
       is no Leader.

  6.2. Composition

    1. The Technical Committee consists of up to 8 Developers, and should
       usually have at least 4 members.
    2. When there are fewer than 8 members the Technical Committee may
       recommend new member(s) to the Project Leader, who may choose
       (individually) to appoint them or not.
    3. When there are 5 members or fewer the Technical Committee may
       appoint new member(s) until the number of members reaches 6.
    4. When there have been 5 members or fewer for at least one week the
       Project Leader may appoint new member(s) until the number of
       members reaches 6, at intervals of at least one week per
       appointment.
    5. If the Technical Committee and the Project Leader agree they may
       remove or replace an existing member of the Technical Committee.

  6.3. Procedure

    1. The Technical Committee uses the Standard Resolution Procedure.
       A draft resolution or amendment may be proposed by any member of
       the Technical Committee. There is no minimum discussion period; the
       voting period lasts for up to one week, or until the outcome is no
       longer in doubt. Members may change their votes. There is a quorum
       of two.
    2. Details regarding voting
       The Chairman has a casting vote. When the Technical Committee votes
       whether to override a Developer who also happens to be a member of
       the Committee, that member may not vote (unless they are the
       Chairman, in which case they may use only their casting vote).
    3. Public discussion and decision-making.
       Discussion, draft resolutions and amendments, and votes by members
       of the committee, are made public on the Technical Committee public
       discussion list. There is no separate secretary for the Committee.
    4. Confidentiality of appointments.
       The Technical Committee may hold confidential discussions via
       private email or a private mailing list or other means to discuss
       appointments to the Committee. However, votes on appointments must
       be public.
    5. No detailed design work.
       The Technical Committee does not engage in design of new proposals
       and policies. Such design work should be carried out by individuals
       privately or together and discussed in ordinary technical policy
       and design forums.
       The Technical Committee restricts itself to choosing from or
       adopting compromises between solutions and decisions which have
       been proposed and reasonably thoroughly discussed elsewhere.
       Individual members of the technical committee may of course
       participate on their own behalf in any aspect of design and policy
       work.
    6. Technical Committee makes decisions only as last resort.
       The Technical Committee does not make a technical decision until
       efforts to resolve it via consensus have been tried and failed,
       unless it has been asked to make a decision by the person or body
       who would normally be responsible for it.

   7. The Project Secretary

  7.1. Powers

   The Secretary:
    1. Takes votes amongst the Developers, and determines the number and
       identity of Developers, whenever this is required by the
       constitution.
    2. Can stand in for the Leader, together with the Chairman of the
       Technical Committee.
       If there is no Project Leader then the Chairman of the Technical
       Committee and the Project Secretary may by joint agreement make
       decisions if they consider it imperative to do so.
    3. Adjudicates any disputes about interpretation of the constitution.
    4. May delegate part or all of their authority to someone else, or
       withdraw such a delegation at any time.

  7.2. Appointment

   The Project Secretary is appointed by the Project Leader and the
   current Project Secretary.

   If the Project Leader and the current Project Secretary cannot agree on
   a new appointment, they must ask the Developers by way of General
   Resolution to appoint a Secretary.

   If there is no Project Secretary or the current Secretary is
   unavailable and has not delegated authority for a decision then the
   decision may be made or delegated by the Chairman of the Technical
   Committee, as Acting Secretary.

   The Project Secretary's term of office is 1 year, at which point they
   or another Secretary must be (re)appointed.

  7.3. Procedure

   The Project Secretary should make decisions which are fair and
   reasonable, and preferably consistent with the consensus of the
   Developers.

   When acting together to stand in for an absent Project Leader the
   Chairman of the Technical Committee and the Project Secretary should
   make decisions only when absolutely necessary and only when consistent
   with the consensus of the Developers.
   8. The Project Leader's Delegates

  8.1. Powers

   The Project Leader's Delegates:
    1. have powers delegated to them by the Project Leader;
    2. may make certain decisions which the Leader may not make directly,
       including approving or expelling Developers or designating people
       as Developers who do not maintain packages. This is to avoid
       concentration of power, particularly over membership as a
       Developer, in the hands of the Project Leader.

  8.2. Appointment

   The Delegates are appointed by the Project Leader and may be replaced
   by the Leader at the Leader's discretion. The Project Leader may not
   make the position as a Delegate conditional on particular decisions by
   the Delegate, nor may they override a decision made by a Delegate once
   made.

  8.3. Procedure

   Delegates may make decisions as they see fit, but should attempt to
   implement good technical decisions and/or follow consensus opinion.
   9. Assets held in trust for Debian

   In most jurisdictions around the world, the Debian project is not in a
   position to directly hold funds or other property. Therefore, property
   has to be owned by any of a number of organisations as detailed in
   §9.2.

   Traditionally, SPI was the sole organisation authorized to hold
   property and monies for the Debian Project. SPI was created in the U.S.
   to hold money in trust there.

   SPI and Debian are separate organisations who share some goals. Debian
   is grateful for the legal support framework offered by SPI.

  9.1. Relationship with Associated Organizations

    1. Debian Developers do not become agents or employees of
       organisations holding assets in trust for Debian, or of each other,
       or of persons in authority in the Debian Project, solely by the
       virtue of being Debian Developers. A person acting as a Developer
       does so as an individual, on their own behalf. Such organisations
       may, of their own accord, establish relationships with individuals
       who are also Debian developers.

  9.2. Authority

    1. An organisation holding assets for Debian has no authority
       regarding Debian's technical or nontechnical decisions, except that
       no decision by Debian with respect to any property held by the
       organisation shall require it to act outside its legal authority.
    2. Debian claims no authority over an organisation that holds assets
       for Debian other than that over the use of property held in trust
       for Debian.

  9.3. Trusted organisations

   Any donations for the Debian Project must be made to any one of a set
   of organisations designated by the Project leader (or a delegate) to be
   authorized to handle assets to be used for the Debian Project.

   Organisations holding assets in trust for Debian should undertake
   reasonable obligations for the handling of such assets.

   Debian maintains a public List of Trusted Organisations that accept
   donations and hold assets in trust for Debian (including both tangible
   property and intellectual property) that includes the commitments those
   organisations have made as to how those assets will be handled.
   A. Standard Resolution Procedure

   These rules apply to communal decision-making by committees and
   plebiscites, where stated above.

  A.1. Proposal

   The formal procedure begins when a draft resolution is proposed and
   sponsored, as required.

  A.1. Discussion and Amendment

    1. Following the proposal, the resolution may be discussed. Amendments
       may be made formal by being proposed and sponsored according to the
       requirements for a new resolution, or directly by the proposer of
       the original resolution.
    2. A formal amendment may be accepted by the resolution's proposer, in
       which case the formal resolution draft is immediately changed to
       match.
    3. If a formal amendment is not accepted, or one of the sponsors of
       the resolution does not agree with the acceptance by the proposer
       of a formal amendment, the amendment remains as an amendment and
       will be voted on.
    4. If an amendment accepted by the original proposer is not to the
       liking of others, they may propose another amendment to reverse the
       earlier change (again, they must meet the requirements for proposer
       and sponsor(s).)
    5. The proposer of a resolution may suggest changes to the wordings of
       amendments; these take effect if the proposer of the amendment
       agrees and none of the sponsors object. In this case the changed
       amendments will be voted on instead of the originals.
    6. The proposer of a resolution may make changes to correct minor
       errors (for example, typographical errors or inconsistencies) or
       changes which do not alter the meaning, providing noone objects
       within 24 hours. In this case the minimum discussion period is not
       restarted.

  A.2. Calling for a vote

    1. The proposer or a sponsor of a motion or an amendment may call for
       a vote, providing that the minimum discussion period (if any) has
       elapsed.
    2. The proposer or any sponsor of a resolution may call for a vote on
       that resolution and all related amendments.
    3. The person who calls for a vote states what they believe the
       wordings of the resolution and any relevant amendments are, and
       consequently what form the ballot should take. However, the final
       decision on the form of ballot(s) is the Secretary's - see 7.1(1),
       7.1(3) and A.3(4).
    4. The minimum discussion period is counted from the time the last
       formal amendment was accepted, or since the whole resolution was
       proposed if no amendments have been proposed and accepted.

  A.3. Voting procedure

    1. Each resolution and its related amendments is voted on in a single
       ballot that includes an option for the original resolution, each
       amendment, and the default option (where applicable).
    2. The default option must not have any supermajority requirements.
       Options which do not have an explicit supermajority requirement
       have a 1:1 majority requirement.
    3. The votes are counted according to the rules in A.6. The default
       option is "Further Discussion", unless specified otherwise.
    4. In cases of doubt the Project Secretary shall decide on matters of
       procedure.

  A.4. Withdrawing resolutions or unaccepted amendments

   The proposer of a resolution or unaccepted amendment may withdraw it.
   In this case new proposers may come forward keep it alive, in which
   case the first person to do so becomes the new proposer and any others
   become sponsors if they aren't sponsors already.

   A sponsor of a resolution or amendment (unless it has been accepted)
   may withdraw.

   If the withdrawal of the proposer and/or sponsors means that a
   resolution has no proposer or not enough sponsors it will not be voted
   on unless this is rectified before the resolution expires.

  A.5. Expiry

   If a proposed resolution has not been discussed, amended, voted on or
   otherwise dealt with for 4 weeks the secretary may issue a statement
   that the issue is being withdrawn. If none of the sponsors of any of
   the proposals object within a week, the issue is withdrawn.

   The secretary may also include suggestions on how to proceed, if
   appropriate.

  A.6. Vote Counting

    1. Each voter's ballot ranks the options being voted on. Not all
       options need be ranked. Ranked options are considered preferred to
       all unranked options. Voters may rank options equally. Unranked
       options are considered to be ranked equally with one another.
       Details of how ballots may be filled out will be included in the
       Call For Votes.
    2. If the ballot has a quorum requirement R any options other than the
       default option which do not receive at least R votes ranking that
       option above the default option are dropped from consideration.
    3. Any (non-default) option which does not defeat the default option
       by its required majority ratio is dropped from consideration.
         1. Given two options A and B, V(A,B) is the number of voters who
            prefer option A over option B.
         2. An option A defeats the default option D by a majority ratio
            N, if V(A,D) is strictly greater than N * V(D,A).
         3. If a supermajority of S:1 is required for A, its majority
            ratio is S; otherwise, its majority ratio is 1.
    4. From the list of undropped options, we generate a list of pairwise
       defeats.
         1. An option A defeats an option B, if V(A,B) is strictly greater
            than V(B,A).
    5. From the list of [undropped] pairwise defeats, we generate a set of
       transitive defeats.
         1. An option A transitively defeats an option C if A defeats C or
            if there is some other option B where A defeats B AND B
            transitively defeats C.
    6. We construct the Schwartz set from the set of transitive defeats.
         1. An option A is in the Schwartz set if for all options B,
            either A transitively defeats B, or B does not transitively
            defeat A.
    7. If there are defeats between options in the Schwartz set, we drop
       the weakest such defeats from the list of pairwise defeats, and
       return to step 5.
         1. A defeat (A,X) is weaker than a defeat (B,Y) if V(A,X) is less
            than V(B,Y). Also, (A,X) is weaker than (B,Y) if V(A,X) is
            equal to V(B,Y) and V(X,A) is greater than V(Y,B).
         2. A weakest defeat is a defeat that has no other defeat weaker
            than it. There may be more than one such defeat.
    8. If there are no defeats within the Schwartz set, then the winner is
       chosen from the options in the Schwartz set. If there is only one
       such option, it is the winner. If there are multiple options, the
       elector with the casting vote chooses which of those options wins.

   Note: Options which the voters rank above the default option are
   options they find acceptable. Options ranked below the default options
   are options they find unacceptable.

   When the Standard Resolution Procedure is to be used, the text which
   refers to it must specify what is sufficient to have a draft resolution
   proposed and/or sponsored, what the minimum discussion period is, and
   what the voting period is. It must also specify any supermajority
   and/or the quorum (and default option) to be used.
   B. Use of language and typography

   The present indicative ("is", for example) means that the statement is
   a rule in this constitution. "May" or "can" indicates that the person
   or body has discretion. "Should" means that it would be considered a
   good thing if the sentence were obeyed, but it is not binding. Text
   marked as a citation, such as this, is rationale and does not form part
   of the constitution. It may be used only to aid interpretation in cases
   of doubt.
